docs/internals/linear_crf_equivalence.md, before:

# Linear CRF Implementation Comparison

**pytorch-crf vs torch-semimarkov K=1**

This document explains the mathematical differences between two linear CRF implementations and demonstrates their functional equivalence for sequence labeling tasks.

## Executive Summary

| Aspect | Finding |
|--------|---------|
| **Numerical equivalence** | No — different probability models |
| **Functional equivalence** | Yes — both achieve same accuracy |
| **Which is "more correct"?** | Both are valid; different modeling choices |
| **Recommendation** | Compare accuracy metrics, not NLL values |

---

## Mathematical Background

A **linear-chain Conditional Random Field (CRF)** defines:

$$
p(\mathbf{y} | \mathbf{x}) = \frac{1}{Z(\mathbf{x})} \prod_{t=1}^{T} \psi_t(y_{t-1}, y_t, \mathbf{x})
$$

where $Z(\mathbf{x})$ is the partition function (normalizing constant).

In log-space, the forward algorithm computes $\log Z$ via messages:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_t(c) = \log \sum_{c'} \exp\bigl(\tilde{\alpha}_{t-1}(c') + \text{trans}(c', c) + \text{emit}_t(c)\bigr)
$$

**The key question**: How do we initialize $\tilde{\alpha}$ at $t=1$ when there is no previous state $y_0$?

---

## The Implementation Difference

### pytorch-crf: Explicit Start Transitions

Uses a dedicated parameter $\pi_c^{\text{start}}$:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_1(c) = \pi_c^{\text{start}} + \text{emit}_1(c)
$$

This is equivalent to having a virtual "START" state with learned transitions to each class.

**Gold score computation:**
$$
\text{score}(\mathbf{y}) = \pi_{y_1}^{\text{start}} + \sum_{t=1}^{T} \text{emit}_t(y_t) + \sum_{t=2}^{T} \text{trans}(y_{t-1}, y_t)
$$

### torch-semimarkov K=1: Uniform Initialization

Initializes all states with zero log-probability:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_0(c) = 0 \quad \forall c
$$

Then applies the standard recurrence at $t=1$:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_1(c) = \text{emit}_1(c) + \log \sum_{c'} \exp\bigl(\text{trans}(c', c)\bigr)
$$

**Gold score computation:**
$$
\text{score}(\mathbf{y}) = \sum_{t=1}^{T} \text{emit}_t(y_t) + \sum_{t=2}^{T} \text{trans}(y_{t-1}, y_t)
$$

Note: No transition score at $t=1$.

---

## Equivalence Condition

The two implementations produce **identical partition functions** when:

$$
\pi_c^{\text{start}} = \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(\text{trans}(c', c)\bigr)
$$

In other words, if pytorch-crf's start transitions are set to the column-wise logsumexp of the transition matrix, both models compute the same $\log Z$.

---

## Which Is "More Correct"?

**Neither — both define valid probability distributions.**

| Approach | Pros | Cons |
|----------|------|------|
| **pytorch-crf** | Standard in CRF literature (Lafferty et al., 2001); can learn asymmetric start preferences | Extra parameters ($C$ start transitions) |
| **torch-semimarkov** | Simpler (fewer parameters); consistent with semi-CRF generalization | Assumes uniform "virtual" start distribution |

\newpage

## When Does the Difference Matter?

| Task | Impact | Reason |
|------|--------|--------|
| **BIO/IOB tagging (NER)** | Moderate | `I-*` tags shouldn't start sequences; start transitions encode this constraint |
| **Phoneme segmentation** | Minimal | Any phoneme can legitimately start an utterance |
| **POS tagging** | Minimal | Most tags can start sentences |
| **Chunking** | Low-Moderate | Similar to NER; some chunk types have start constraints |

**Bottom line**: For tasks without structural constraints on sequence starts, the choice between implementations is primarily about API preference and performance characteristics.

---

## Empirical Validation

### Test Setup

To demonstrate functional equivalence, we train both implementations on identical synthetic data where the correct answer is unambiguous.

**Data generation:**
```python
# Configuration
batch_size = 32
seq_len = 20
num_classes = 5
torch.manual_seed(42)

# Generate random ground-truth labels
labels = torch.randint(0, num_classes, (batch_size, seq_len))

# Create emissions with strong signal for correct labels
# Base: random noise with std=0.3
emissions = torch.randn(batch_size, seq_len, num_classes) * 0.3

# Add +2.0 to emission score for the correct label at each position
for b in range(batch_size):
    for t in range(seq_len):
        emissions[b, t, labels[b, t]] += 2.0
```

This creates a dataset where:
- Each position has a "correct" label with emission score ~2.0
- Incorrect labels have emission scores ~0.0 (noise)
- A well-trained CRF should achieve 100% accuracy

**Training configuration:**
- Optimizer: Adam with lr=0.1
- Epochs: 100
- No regularization (to isolate CRF behavior)
- pytorch-crf: `start_transitions` and `end_transitions` initialized to zero
- torch-semimarkov: K=1, uniform duration distribution, `emission_proj = Identity()`

**Evaluation:**
- Viterbi decode both models on the training data
- Compute frame-level accuracy: `correct_predictions / total_frames`

### Results

| Model | Final Accuracy |
|-------|----------------|
| pytorch-crf | **100.0%** (640/640) |
| torch-semimarkov K=1 | **100.0%** (640/640) |

*Note: Final loss values are intentionally omitted because:*

1. *The two implementations define different probability distributions (see Mathematical Background)*
2. *torch-semimarkov applies **zero-centering** to emission scores before computing cumulative sums (for numerical stability with sequences >100K frames). This shifts the absolute scale of both partition function and gold score. Because logsumexp is nonlinear, this centering affects them differently—causing the reported loss to become negative after training on easy data. This does NOT indicate invalid probabilities, just a shifted internal representation.*

*Accuracy is the only meaningful comparison metric.*

**Interpretation**: Both models achieve perfect accuracy on this task, demonstrating that:

1. Both implementations learn valid CRF parameters
2. Both Viterbi decoders find the correct MAP sequence
3. The different first-position handling does not prevent learning

The synthetic data is intentionally easy (large emission gap) to isolate CRF correctness from optimization difficulty. On real tasks with ambiguous emissions, both models would make similar errors.

### NLL Comparison (Not Meaningful)

To illustrate why NLL values cannot be compared, we compute NLL on the same data using both implementations with **identical transition matrices** (fixed random values, no training):

| Sequence Length | pytorch-crf NLL | semimarkov NLL | Difference |
|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|------------|
| T=5 | 8.59 | 11.77 | -3.18 |
| T=10 | 24.82 | 25.44 | -0.62 |
| T=20 | 57.37 | 56.27 | +1.10 |
| T=50 | 130.10 | 127.20 | +2.90 |

The differences vary in both sign and magnitude because:

1. **Different probability models**: Each implementation computes $\log p(y|x)$ under its own model, which includes different handling of the first position.
2. **The gap is not constant**: The first-position contribution affects each sample differently depending on how the data aligns with each model's assumptions.
3. **Neither is "wrong"**: Both values are valid NLLs under their respective probability distributions.

**Bottom line**: Do not compare NLL across implementations. Compare accuracy instead.

---

## Recommendations for Benchmarking

### Meaningful Comparisons

| Metric | Why |
|--------|-----|
| **Accuracy** (PER, F1) | Same prediction task, comparable outputs |
| **Training speed** | Measures computational efficiency |
| **Memory usage** | Measures scalability |
| **Convergence rate** | Epochs to reach target accuracy |

### Not Meaningful

| Metric | Why Not |
|--------|---------|
| **NLL values** | Different normalizations |
| **Perplexity** | Derived from NLL |
| **Log-likelihood** | Different probability models |

---

## Implications for torch-semimarkov

The K=1 mode of torch-semimarkov is a **valid linear CRF** that:

1. Implements the standard forward-backward algorithm
2. Uses a simpler initialization scheme (no extra parameters)
3. Provides a clean generalization path to semi-CRF (K>1)
4. Offers GPU acceleration via Triton streaming kernels

When comparing against pytorch-crf baselines:

- **Expect similar accuracy** (validates correctness)
- **Expect different NLL** (different models, both valid)
- **Focus on speed/memory** (validates performance claims)

---

## References

1. Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. (2001). *Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data.* ICML.

2. Sarawagi, S., & Cohen, W. W. (2004). *Semi-Markov Conditional Random Fields for Information Extraction.* NeurIPS.

---

## Appendix: LaTeX Equations

For inclusion in paper supplementary material:

```latex
% Forward Algorithm Variants

\textbf{pytorch-crf (explicit start transitions):}
\begin{align}
    \tilde{\alpha}_1(c) &= \pi_c^{\text{start}} + \text{emit}_1(c) \\
    \tilde{\alpha}_t(c) &= \text{emit}_t(c) + \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(
        \tilde{\alpha}_{t-1}(c') + \text{trans}(c', c)\bigr) \quad t > 1
\end{align}

\textbf{torch-semimarkov K=1 (uniform initialization):}
\begin{align}
    \tilde{\alpha}_0(c) &= 0 \quad \forall c \in \{1, \ldots, C\} \\
    \tilde{\alpha}_t(c) &= \text{emit}_t(c) + \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(
        \tilde{\alpha}_{t-1}(c') + \text{trans}(c', c)\bigr) \quad t \geq 1
\end{align}

\textbf{Equivalence condition:}
\begin{equation}
    \pi_c^{\text{start}} = \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(\text{trans}(c', c)\bigr)
\end{equation}
```

---

## Running the Tests

The full test suite is available at `benchmarks/practical_demonstration/timit/linear_crf_equivalence.py` and includes:

| Test | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `test_forward_algorithm_difference()` | Shows exact numerical difference in partition function |
| `test_gold_score_difference()` | Demonstrates gold score computation differences |
| `test_library_comparison()` | Compares actual library implementations across sequence lengths |
| `test_training_convergence()` | Validates both achieve same accuracy (the key test) |
| `test_gradient_comparison()` | Shows gradient differences for transition parameters |

```bash
# Run the full equivalence test suite
python benchmarks/practical_demonstration/timit/linear_crf_equivalence.py

# Convert this document to PDF
pandoc docs/linear_crf_equivalence.md -o docs/linear_crf_equivalence.pdf
```

All tests use fixed random seeds for reproducibility.

Commit message:

bulk rename from torch-semimarkov to flash-semicrf

docs/internals/linear_crf_equivalence.md, after:

# Linear CRF Implementation Comparison

**pytorch-crf vs flash-semicrf K=1**

This document explains the mathematical differences between two linear CRF implementations and demonstrates their functional equivalence for sequence labeling tasks.

## Executive Summary

| Aspect | Finding |
|--------|---------|
| **Numerical equivalence** | No — different probability models |
| **Functional equivalence** | Yes — both achieve same accuracy |
| **Which is "more correct"?** | Both are valid; different modeling choices |
| **Recommendation** | Compare accuracy metrics, not NLL values |

---

## Mathematical Background

A **linear-chain Conditional Random Field (CRF)** defines:

$$
p(\mathbf{y} | \mathbf{x}) = \frac{1}{Z(\mathbf{x})} \prod_{t=1}^{T} \psi_t(y_{t-1}, y_t, \mathbf{x})
$$

where $Z(\mathbf{x})$ is the partition function (normalizing constant).

In log-space, the forward algorithm computes $\log Z$ via messages:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_t(c) = \log \sum_{c'} \exp\bigl(\tilde{\alpha}_{t-1}(c') + \text{trans}(c', c) + \text{emit}_t(c)\bigr)
$$

**The key question**: How do we initialize $\tilde{\alpha}$ at $t=1$ when there is no previous state $y_0$?

---

## The Implementation Difference

### pytorch-crf: Explicit Start Transitions

Uses a dedicated parameter $\pi_c^{\text{start}}$:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_1(c) = \pi_c^{\text{start}} + \text{emit}_1(c)
$$

This is equivalent to having a virtual "START" state with learned transitions to each class.

**Gold score computation:**
$$
\text{score}(\mathbf{y}) = \pi_{y_1}^{\text{start}} + \sum_{t=1}^{T} \text{emit}_t(y_t) + \sum_{t=2}^{T} \text{trans}(y_{t-1}, y_t)
$$

### flash-semicrf K=1: Uniform Initialization

Initializes all states with zero log-probability:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_0(c) = 0 \quad \forall c
$$

Then applies the standard recurrence at $t=1$:

$$
\tilde{\alpha}_1(c) = \text{emit}_1(c) + \log \sum_{c'} \exp\bigl(\text{trans}(c', c)\bigr)
$$

**Gold score computation:**
$$
\text{score}(\mathbf{y}) = \sum_{t=1}^{T} \text{emit}_t(y_t) + \sum_{t=2}^{T} \text{trans}(y_{t-1}, y_t)
$$

Note: No transition score at $t=1$.

---

## Equivalence Condition

The two implementations produce **identical partition functions** when:

$$
\pi_c^{\text{start}} = \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(\text{trans}(c', c)\bigr)
$$

In other words, if pytorch-crf's start transitions are set to the column-wise logsumexp of the transition matrix, both models compute the same $\log Z$.

---

## Which Is "More Correct"?

**Neither — both define valid probability distributions.**

| Approach | Pros | Cons |
|----------|------|------|
| **pytorch-crf** | Standard in CRF literature (Lafferty et al., 2001); can learn asymmetric start preferences | Extra parameters ($C$ start transitions) |
| **flash-semicrf** | Simpler (fewer parameters); consistent with semi-CRF generalization | Assumes uniform "virtual" start distribution |

\newpage

## When Does the Difference Matter?

| Task | Impact | Reason |
|------|--------|--------|
| **BIO/IOB tagging (NER)** | Moderate | `I-*` tags shouldn't start sequences; start transitions encode this constraint |
| **Phoneme segmentation** | Minimal | Any phoneme can legitimately start an utterance |
| **POS tagging** | Minimal | Most tags can start sentences |
| **Chunking** | Low-Moderate | Similar to NER; some chunk types have start constraints |

**Bottom line**: For tasks without structural constraints on sequence starts, the choice between implementations is primarily about API preference and performance characteristics.

---

## Empirical Validation

### Test Setup

To demonstrate functional equivalence, we train both implementations on identical synthetic data where the correct answer is unambiguous.

**Data generation:**
```python
# Configuration
batch_size = 32
seq_len = 20
num_classes = 5
torch.manual_seed(42)

# Generate random ground-truth labels
labels = torch.randint(0, num_classes, (batch_size, seq_len))

# Create emissions with strong signal for correct labels
# Base: random noise with std=0.3
emissions = torch.randn(batch_size, seq_len, num_classes) * 0.3

# Add +2.0 to emission score for the correct label at each position
for b in range(batch_size):
    for t in range(seq_len):
        emissions[b, t, labels[b, t]] += 2.0
```

This creates a dataset where:
- Each position has a "correct" label with emission score ~2.0
- Incorrect labels have emission scores ~0.0 (noise)
- A well-trained CRF should achieve 100% accuracy

**Training configuration:**
- Optimizer: Adam with lr=0.1
- Epochs: 100
- No regularization (to isolate CRF behavior)
- pytorch-crf: `start_transitions` and `end_transitions` initialized to zero
- flash-semicrf: K=1, uniform duration distribution, `emission_proj = Identity()`

**Evaluation:**
- Viterbi decode both models on the training data
- Compute frame-level accuracy: `correct_predictions / total_frames`

### Results

| Model | Final Accuracy |
|-------|----------------|
| pytorch-crf | **100.0%** (640/640) |
| flash-semicrf K=1 | **100.0%** (640/640) |

*Note: Final loss values are intentionally omitted because:*

1. *The two implementations define different probability distributions (see Mathematical Background)*
2. *flash-semicrf applies **zero-centering** to emission scores before computing cumulative sums (for numerical stability with sequences >100K frames). This shifts the absolute scale of both partition function and gold score. Because logsumexp is nonlinear, this centering affects them differently—causing the reported loss to become negative after training on easy data. This does NOT indicate invalid probabilities, just a shifted internal representation.*

*Accuracy is the only meaningful comparison metric.*

**Interpretation**: Both models achieve perfect accuracy on this task, demonstrating that:

1. Both implementations learn valid CRF parameters
2. Both Viterbi decoders find the correct MAP sequence
3. The different first-position handling does not prevent learning

The synthetic data is intentionally easy (large emission gap) to isolate CRF correctness from optimization difficulty. On real tasks with ambiguous emissions, both models would make similar errors.

### NLL Comparison (Not Meaningful)

To illustrate why NLL values cannot be compared, we compute NLL on the same data using both implementations with **identical transition matrices** (fixed random values, no training):

| Sequence Length | pytorch-crf NLL | semimarkov NLL | Difference |
|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|------------|
| T=5 | 8.59 | 11.77 | -3.18 |
| T=10 | 24.82 | 25.44 | -0.62 |
| T=20 | 57.37 | 56.27 | +1.10 |
| T=50 | 130.10 | 127.20 | +2.90 |

The differences vary in both sign and magnitude because:

1. **Different probability models**: Each implementation computes $\log p(y|x)$ under its own model, which includes different handling of the first position.
2. **The gap is not constant**: The first-position contribution affects each sample differently depending on how the data aligns with each model's assumptions.
3. **Neither is "wrong"**: Both values are valid NLLs under their respective probability distributions.

**Bottom line**: Do not compare NLL across implementations. Compare accuracy instead.

---

## Recommendations for Benchmarking

### Meaningful Comparisons

| Metric | Why |
|--------|-----|
| **Accuracy** (PER, F1) | Same prediction task, comparable outputs |
| **Training speed** | Measures computational efficiency |
| **Memory usage** | Measures scalability |
| **Convergence rate** | Epochs to reach target accuracy |

### Not Meaningful

| Metric | Why Not |
|--------|---------|
| **NLL values** | Different normalizations |
| **Perplexity** | Derived from NLL |
| **Log-likelihood** | Different probability models |

---

## Implications for flash-semicrf

The K=1 mode of flash-semicrf is a **valid linear CRF** that:

1. Implements the standard forward-backward algorithm
2. Uses a simpler initialization scheme (no extra parameters)
3. Provides a clean generalization path to semi-CRF (K>1)
4. Offers GPU acceleration via Triton streaming kernels

When comparing against pytorch-crf baselines:

- **Expect similar accuracy** (validates correctness)
- **Expect different NLL** (different models, both valid)
- **Focus on speed/memory** (validates performance claims)

---

## References

1. Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., & Pereira, F. (2001). *Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data.* ICML.

2. Sarawagi, S., & Cohen, W. W. (2004). *Semi-Markov Conditional Random Fields for Information Extraction.* NeurIPS.

---

## Appendix: LaTeX Equations

For inclusion in paper supplementary material:

```latex
% Forward Algorithm Variants

\textbf{pytorch-crf (explicit start transitions):}
\begin{align}
    \tilde{\alpha}_1(c) &= \pi_c^{\text{start}} + \text{emit}_1(c) \\
    \tilde{\alpha}_t(c) &= \text{emit}_t(c) + \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(
        \tilde{\alpha}_{t-1}(c') + \text{trans}(c', c)\bigr) \quad t > 1
\end{align}

\textbf{flash-semicrf K=1 (uniform initialization):}
\begin{align}
    \tilde{\alpha}_0(c) &= 0 \quad \forall c \in \{1, \ldots, C\} \\
    \tilde{\alpha}_t(c) &= \text{emit}_t(c) + \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(
        \tilde{\alpha}_{t-1}(c') + \text{trans}(c', c)\bigr) \quad t \geq 1
\end{align}

\textbf{Equivalence condition:}
\begin{equation}
    \pi_c^{\text{start}} = \log \sum_{c'=1}^{C} \exp\bigl(\text{trans}(c', c)\bigr)
\end{equation}
```

---

## Running the Tests

The full test suite is available at `benchmarks/practical_demonstration/timit/linear_crf_equivalence.py` and includes:

| Test | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `test_forward_algorithm_difference()` | Shows exact numerical difference in partition function |
| `test_gold_score_difference()` | Demonstrates gold score computation differences |
| `test_library_comparison()` | Compares actual library implementations across sequence lengths |
| `test_training_convergence()` | Validates both achieve same accuracy (the key test) |
| `test_gradient_comparison()` | Shows gradient differences for transition parameters |

```bash
# Run the full equivalence test suite
python benchmarks/practical_demonstration/timit/linear_crf_equivalence.py

# Convert this document to PDF
pandoc docs/linear_crf_equivalence.md -o docs/linear_crf_equivalence.pdf
```

All tests use fixed random seeds for reproducibility.
